Speaking of the binary system and the decimal system, you might remember that sometimes throughout the
course, you've got a strange output for a seemingly easy calculations.
Let's say we're adding .2 and .4, now what we get as a result is actually this which makes little
sense,
right,
this should be 0.6
and indeed if you would compare the result of that with 0.6, you would get false. Why is 0.2
+ 0.4 not equal to 0.6 in Javascript? I mean that's certainly not what
we learned in math.
Well it's all coming down to that binary system which Javascript and which actually all programming
languages use behind the scenes and the decimal system in which we, the programmer, work. When we say 0.2
and 0.4, we're of course working in the decimal system,
so with a base of 10. Now Javascript internally as you learned works with the binary system
and as I also just said, pretty much all programming languages do that. Now therefore, Javascript converts
this number to the binary system for doing the calculation and then basically converts it back to give
us an output that makes sense to us humans because we rather work with the decimal system than with the
binary system, right? Now that's exactly the issue,
it's important to understand that in the end, numbers like this one here with decimal places are in the
end just represented as fractions of integers
you could say, so for example 0.2 in the decimal system could be represented by 1/5 and
0.4 could be 2/5 of course, in the decimal system.
So in a decimal system, these calculations are super simple right,
we can perform them perfectly.
Now in the binary system, that's different, to understand this,
let's first of all have a look at a calculation which we can't really solve or where we have no perfect
result in the decimal system as well
and that would be 1/3. In the decimal system,
we get this number when we try to do that calculation because as you are aware in the decimal system,
we can't find a perfect solution for this division
and in the binary system, similar cases exist, not for 1/3 necessarily but for example,
for 1/5.
Now for that, it can be convenient to find out how numbers are represented in the binary system and
that can easily be done by entering a number,
for example 1 and if it's just an integer, you should wrap it between parentheses to tell Javascript that
now with a dot, you're accessing a method on the number and not adding a decimal place to it.
So then you can enter to string here and to string actually takes an optional argument where you can
define the base to which you want to convert that number, if you enter two here, we're printing the number
1 in the binary system which however still is 1 because in the binary system, we have the numbers or
the digits 0 and 1,
so 1 is also 1 in the binary system,
now that changes if we try 5 here. Remember 0.2 is the same as 1/5, now 5 in the
binary system is 101,
so in the end you're dividing one by 101 in the binary system when you're trying to
express 0.2. You can actually see the exact result of that division if you execute 1/5
and then call to string at a base of two, this number here, that's in the end what we end up
with in the binary system if we try to divide 1 by 5 in the decimal system,
so this is the result of the to the binary system converted calculation Javascript performed.
So this number, 0.2 in the end is this number here in the binary system you could say, you can
of course also see that if you call to string here and add two here as a base on 0.2, here we
don't need the parentheses because we already have one dot in there and therefore it's clear to Javascript
that this is the number
and this is then a method on the number.
So this is how this number is represented in the binary system
and here it's simply getting cut off
but in the end this pattern here would be repeated infinitely in the binary system, just like the three
is repeated infinitely in the decimal system if we divide one by three. So there simply are certain fractions
where there is no perfect solution in the binary system just as
there are certain divisions, like 1/3 where there is no perfect solution in the decimal
system
and it's because of that why we end up with this strange result here.
In the end both 0.2 and 0.4 don't yield a perfect result,
so if we then add these two not perfect results, we get a imperfect result because we add two numbers
which can't really be solved in the end. It's the same as if you would say 1/3 +
1/3 + 1/3.
Now here, we get one because Javascript does some rounding for us to give us a result that makes sense
but in the end, you are working here with 0.33333 + 0.33333
+ 0.33333 in the decimal system and hence you would end up with something like this
in a decimal system, you can't really reach 1 and it's the same for the binary system with 0.2
+ 0.4, you can't really reach 0.6 because in the binary system, both these numbers
can't really be solved, there isn't a finite amount of decimal places that would be needed to represent
each number.
Now often in Javascript, Javascript fixes this for us, it shows us a number that makes sense to us even
though in the binary system, it can't really be represented,
for example if we just use 0.2. You just learned that there is no perfect representation of
that in the binary system.
Still if Javascript converts the binary representation, which just to bring it back in memory was this
here, when it converts this back to a decimal number to output it to us, it converts it back into a perfect
decimal number and not in to something like this but this is just a trick by Javascript and many programming
languages do that,
they of course don't want to show this to us,
instead they want to give us a result that makes sense to us and they're generally pretty smart about
rounding the numbers they got in the binary system.
Nonetheless, you can see that there is imprecision if you use another method which is to fixed, to fix
does not convert this,
instead here you can set a certain amount of digits you want to output and for example if you enter 20 here,
you force Javascript to represent this as a number with 20 decimal places and you see, at some point
of time, we can see that imprecision here,
so Javascript is really just doing some smart rounding for us when it just outputs 0.2, behind
the scenes,
that number looks like that. Now is that a problem?
No,
generally that's not a problem. For most calculations,
this automatic rounding works just fine.
Now if you want to output a number to the user, you of course want to avoid that 0.2 +
0.4 is printed like this somewhere on your page. To avoid
this, you can use that to fixed method you just learned about, there for example you could force Javascript
to just display two decimal places and you would end up with a perfectly fine number
and of course you can specify any amount of decimal places you want - 2, 1, 0, whatever you want and Javascript
will round it and avoid showing this imprecision here.
So for outputting results to your end users, to fixed is a great way of working around that issue here.
Now there are certain other calculations however where you don't just worry about the thing or the result
you show to the user but about the result itself.
Let's say you have an online shop and you're working with prices there.
Now if something costs 20.2 euros or dollars and you send that to your server to charge the credit
card by that amount, then behind the scenes, you are sending this number to your servers
and therefore here in the end, you're charging not enough.
Now of course chances are that when you're charging something like this, the payment service you're using
automatically rounds this to fix your error or do anything like that but chances are also that you in the end
do introduce some small errors and therefore you sometimes might charge too much or too little
and over time, even such small deviations can really add up.
Imagine Amazon charging to a little bit too much or a little bit too less on every transaction, well
they're handling thousands of transactions every hour of course,
so there, that would quickly add up and therefore, there are situations where you need perfect precision.
Now to get perfect precision,
one common solution is to simply multiply your number with 100 in the end so that you only work
with integers.
Now you learned there are no integers in Javascript,
everything is a floating point number but of course this integer here whilst it not being an integer
would be this floating point number
and this can be represented perfectly in binary notation so you won't have any imprecision here.
So working with integers only can be one workaround around such imprecision here.
You also can find certain Javascript packages and libraries, by the way libraries are a topic we'll
have a closer look in detail later in the course but certain third-party add-ons you can add to your
page, to your application so to say
which also provides you tools, utility functions to fix such imprecision or of course, you know you are
using some service maybe on your server or some third-party service your web app talks to which fixes
such issues for you.
Again often, they may not matter especially for outputting something to the user,
you can just use to fixed but in some cases where they do matter, you should be aware of that imprecision
and that there are workarounds, like for example only working with integers by multiplying with
100 for example.